Our country, both past and present, First National Bank, a Franklin family community bank, proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Meet Ed Higgins of College Station.
As a World War II navigator on six B-17 missions over Europe, he experienced his share of uncertain moments, like his very first mission to Brandenburg, the gateway to Berlin, navigator of the 36th plane group.
And then there were the three missions where the beaches at Roy in France was the target, then over Dresden, finally Ingolstadt.
After his tour of Europe, he became a pilot as a captain and was the ranking student officer in flight training
at Bryan Air Force Base.
Ed Higgins' love of flying has not stopped.
At age 83, he still flies today.
We welcome Lieutenant Colonel Ed Higgins to Veterans of the Valley.
It's indeed a pleasure to have you, Ed, here on Veterans of the Valley.
I want to move forward to get you into World War II, but talk a little bit about getting into the military and leading up to that.
I know that you were a native of South Carolina.
You went to Clemson.
Your dad was in World War I.
You were gonna go into the Army, but your buddies talked about the Army Air Corps.
So sort of take it from there and lead us on.
Right, and so I did go in to the Aviation Cadet Program where I went to Gulf Warfield, Mississippi, and then they sent you to College Training Detachment.
I went to Sioux City, Iowa at Morningside College and got jumped two classes, which is good because
Had I not, I might have been a cadet the whole war.
There was like, I know several people that had that happen.
So I got a little ahead of the curve.
And of course, by the year at Clemson in ROTC, that gave me a little,
I knew military drill and ceremonies a lot more than the typical cadet.
So therefore, I was real glad when I got classified bombardier navigator and pilot, but chosen to be navigator because they had most of the pilots.
And so I got into that.
phase.
Right.
You could have been a pilot right then, so you had your choice because you had qualified in all three, like you said.
Yes.
You went to gunnery school in Arizona.
You got your gunnery wings, and then navigator school in Louisiana graduated from there in October of 44.
So take us from there.
That's when you got introduced to the B-17s.
Okay, and the fact that I'd gone through gunnery school where in the B-17, you had two guns up front.
So that gave me a step up when I wanted to go to B-17s, and I did go to Tampa, Florida, MacDill Air Force Base.
which is still an active base, in a training situation where we formed up a crew and our commander, the first pilot was Sam Burrows, a former football player at Auburn.
He was an old guy, 24 years old, although our bombardier was a former policeman from Detroit and he was 30, but most of us were under 20.
I was 18.
18 years old.
Wow.
Young and probably wondering what you were getting into, right?
Right, but I felt invulnerable.
I didn't realize there would be a few moments of terror.
Right.
Well, talk about that because you were on quite an active mission to begin with, and you didn't know that it was as active as it really was.
Talk about the B-17.
This was your plane.
Obviously, it's a key mission.
aircraft of World War II and I know you're proud to be part of it.
They made over 12,000 of them and I know there's an exact number that the Confederate Air Force has when they go out on missions now called the commemorative Air Force.
But it was a plane that was supposed to be able to take a lot of punishment and come back and it did in so many cases.
Of course, we never had but one occasion at Dresden where we did lose an engine.
And they said, give me a heading to Switzerland.
And I did 240.
And then we got this engine going again and began to look for other planes to join up on.
So it was a plane that I had a great love for and still do.
It's great in that I'm in the commemorative Air Force and
occasionally get to fly on the Lone Star Flight Museum B-17.
And if we ever get the one in Houston restored, we've been working for five years to put it back.
It had a lot of corrosion because of being outside.
Now it's in a hangar at Hobbit.
I see.
Of the many World War II flyers that we've had on Veterans of the Valley, I've probably had more navigators than any other job
Talk about the job of being a navigator for a plane this size, for a bomber this size, and sort of what your duties were to keep them on course, right?
Right.
On a typical mission, you have navigators go to a certain place and pilots have their briefing, and there will be a staff that have worked out the course and speeds and checkpoints, and you get briefed there, and then you all get together as a crew, and you fill in all the crew on what you're doing, where you're going,
and what the probability, if it's gonna be flack or fighters, the probability of that.
Of course, in training, you don't have that problem.
You just practice formation flying a lot.
Right.
Six missions over Europe, and you chronicled them very well in the very first one, like we said in the opening.
This was your first flight, and you were the number two plane in your 36th plane group.
And this was a mission, the Berlin mission to Brandenburg, which was the gateway of Berlin.
Talk about that mission.
Well, it was beautiful weather, and so we formed up.
The way you formed up, you took off from your base at a certain interval, and you honed in on a buncher beacon, they called it.
And as a navigator, I would tell my pilot, okay, home in, Sam.
And you kept climbing, and if there were clouds in, you would pop out above the clouds and form up in the whole group, and it would head out.
There was what they called like a lead cow, the rally point airplane.
And so...
You headed out, it's a space, and it was really beautiful to see the other planes behind our head.
And once you got over France, here came the fighters racing by.
There was no need for them to take off until later.
And that was really high adventure, seeing them racing to the front of the lead planes.
Right, right.
These planes flew in groups, actually 1,000-plane groups.
That must have been to be able to look out and see something like that.
I cannot imagine how awesome a sight that might be.
Yeah, after we had flown about four missions, we got to be the lead, the Rallye Point airplane, which was a high honor.
We took off first, we established ourselves, and then we headed out and called, and the first group came behind us, and we got clear over to France,
And then we turned back, and I'll never forget seeing the beauty of group after group after group all tucked in in formation.
We didn't get credit for a combat mission, but that gave us the potential to be a lead crew had the war continued.
I certainly didn't know that the Germans were going to, we thought the Germans were going to hold out at Hitler's Redoubt.
It turned out that that was only a fantasy.
The war was quickly over May 8th.
Right.
You talked about flak, and we've had other people on the show that talk about it, and it's a scary thing.
It was one of the weapons, obviously, of World War II, and it made rides very dicey and very bumpy at times.
You engaged a lot of flak.
Right, both at Berlin and at Dresden and at Ingolstadt.
Those three now, the three at Royan, it was low stuff.
You could see them shooting, but it was way below.
They didn't have the big 88s.
But the others, you'd see, it was just like in the movies where you'd see the poof of a flak, and I saw one hit a P-51 escort, and it just disintegrated.
And I saw another B-17 get hit, and it was spinning in just like the old Piper J-3 Cub.
And you wondered, why aren't they getting out?
Maybe they did later, but...
It was very, and I didn't know that was a rough mission.
I thought maybe it's like this every time.
And when I got back and I was debriefing, they said, boy, that was a rough one.
Oh, okay, I didn't know any better.
Your second mission, which I think was three consecutive days, your second, third, and fourth missions, three consecutive days,
The target was actually France, Royan France.
Talk about why that was and what the mission was.
Okay, that was the gateway to the port of Bordeaux, and the French needed to open that up so they could get supplies to refurbish all the areas that had been blown up during the invasion and the battle across France.
So the French Navy was poised with troops off the coast.
As soon as we had hit the three days of softening it up, they came in and made their invasion and quickly subdued, I think, some 100,000 Germans.
That were in the way.
That were holding that port.
Right.
I want you to talk about, you referred to this earlier, one time much later on in your career at a Confederate Air Force event.
you ran into a pilot, a German pilot, right?
Right.
A German pilot that had been at Brandenburg and he was one of the jet pilots.
And of course they were far superior to anything we had.
And I think there was a,
a gunner later shot one down and he got a distinguished flying force.
But it's interesting to know that the first German jet shot down was by the Tuskegee Airmen, who were great pilots.
They were almost all college graduates and determined to show that they could be better than anybody.
as they proved they were in their unit.
Exactly.
But that was interesting.
But we didn't see any of those shot down.
I saw them take off at Brandenburg and go over the top, hit a plane ahead and hit a plane behind, and they missed us.
It wasn't my day to go.
Right, right.
But talk about this fellow that you met.
But he did say that he went out, he couldn't get to his plane, so he went out into the woods, hiding behind a big tree, and here came bombs hitting.
Well, one of our squadrons overshot a bit, and some of the bombs hit out in the woods.
And he wondered how we knew he was there.
We didn't.
And we both shook hands and laughed and said, we're glad we didn't get each other.
He and I was a citizen of Canada.
Right, right.
And you all shook hands and said, I'm glad you're here and I'm glad that I'm here.
Right.
There was a lot of camaraderie among, if you were captured, you hoped that the Luftwaffe got you.
They would hide you from the SS.
You would swap wings and then you would go to prison camp, which was no problem.
hilton but it beat the heck out of anything in japan right or if the ss got you or the worst would of course the civilians and i don't blame them if you just blown up the family barn right you would be a bit ticked off right right well it was a civil situation i know i've i've read a book uh about the uh the the
prisoner of war camp in Hearn, that we have down here in Hearn, where the Germans were held there.
And it was that type of thing.
Second mission, or the third mission, excuse me, at Royan, and it involved what we know now as napalm.
Yes, uh-huh.
Jellied gasoline, we called it.
We didn't know any better, but that was what was used pretty well to subdue Japan, the missions there, until finally they dotted the T with the two A-bombs.
But they had pretty well bombed it out.
Now, we were, of course, after we had done our missions and came back to the States, we were supposed to fit out into B-29s and go as our group to Japan in B-29s.
But, of course, that didn't get to happen, and I accepted it.
Right.
Your fifth mission, Dresden, and I know that this has a very, it's a sad story to it, as you suspect.
Talk about that.
Well, I noted, and I have a log, and I was looking at it about a month ago, and I put it somewhere in my house, and I can't find it.
But anyway, I noted there were 500, I estimate, railroad cars on the railroad tracks there, and they were pointing east.
We were always supposed to point out anything we saw, but in the break in the clouds, we saw those.
And I thought they were loaded with German troops.
Probably they were loaded with German Jews that were being sent to the Holocaust.
I didn't even know there was such a thing then.
And of course, I would have posted it when we got back and I don't know where they went back and shot it up or bombed it or what.
I hope they didn't.
Exactly.
You lost an engine on that mission.
Right.
We had a prop runaway, and so we couldn't feather it.
And that's bad because eventually it may break off and do a lot of damage like bring the plane down.
So we finally got it to reduce power.
We broke out of formation.
We ducked into clouds and began to work with it.
And my pilot said, give me a heading to Switzerland.
So I said, 240, and then we'll fine-tune it.
Anyway, we broke out of the clouds and here is another plane right with us.
I mean, like in formation, but neither saw each other, of course.
My guardian angel was on duty that day because we broke out then.
And we started fiddling with that engine and began to get partial power.
So then my pilot said, give me a heading to England.
Okay, let's do 280.
And so we started join up with all kinds of planes that had broken, got into the weather.
And we ended up with 12 planes and no two from the same group.
Well, as we were flying back, we saw this plane coming down from the northwest, and it didn't look like it was one of ours or anybody.
So we knew the Germans had some fake airplanes.
That is, they had captured planes, and they would drive up into the formation and shoot some down.
So we put a burst out across the plane, and it broke off and went back toward Germany, the northern Germany.
So it probably was one of those.
There was a squadron they had of replica airplanes that had been rebuilt.
Right.
And your sixth mission, Ingolstadt, what was that?
Ingolstadt was supposed to be at Munich because there were German jets parked on the Autobahn.
The Germans were thinking ahead when they built those Autobahns and had areas where you could literally have airfields.
And there were 300 German jets there.
Well, when we got over there, they reported that they
were out of fuel, no need to bomb them.
So we then picked up a target of opportunity.
Our second was Engelstadt, which was a town and it had a bridge over the Rhine, so why not knock it out?
So we all dumped on poor old Engelstadt.
Indeed, indeed.
We have some photographs and some very compelling photographs that Lieutenant Colonel Higgins has brought
and some of these photographs were taken from his plane on one of some of these bombing missions.
This is out of sort of a yearbook that you have of your group, and this is the front inside cover that we got a scan of, and you're actually flying in that airplane, right?
Yeah, that is that first mission to Berlin with Bob Glazen of Beaumont, the head, the backup pilot, the deputy lead, and of course, had that lead ship up there, which probably had Major Carmack,
who was a great west border and a great leader.
Unfortunately, he later was killed in a plane crash later on in his career, which was a pity he'd have made General a great leader.
So I was up there navigating the way, following.
There you go.
Let's move on to the next one.
Here's your group.
And that is my crew picture.
Sam Burr is on the left and George Nichols, the bombardier, and Owen Paul, who is still alive out in Seattle, Washington.
And there I am on the right, the lower level.
And then the other mazooker on the left was the best deputy pilot, Noy Eisenhawker.
And then on the right is the ball turret gunner.
They were always free spirits.
You really had to bail them out, but you'd throw them, bust them in private, and then promote them back to Sergeant Chandler.
And he's still alive in New Orleans.
It's amazing.
You might forget who you met yesterday, but you'll never forget these names, will you?
Let's move on to another one.
Talk about that.
That's a good-looking young man.
That was the day I went into the Air Force as an aviation student to report to Gulf Fort Field, Mississippi, and that was my famous dog spot, a bird-dog champion.
I loved to quail hunt.
And my bike, I left to ride my bike over to play baseball, and I was heading off for the adventure.
You had to say goodbye to not only your family, but to the spot too, right?
Yep.
Yeah, that must have been tough.
Yeah, of course, I was still not very sad.
I was looking forward to what was next.
It's a fine-looking bicycle there.
Yeah, a sterling bicycle built like a watch.
All right.
Okay, this is Royan, the first day of the bombing.
And you see the target there is the beach.
And if you look right in the middle of the picture, you see the cluster of bombs that have just left your airplane.
That's just a fascinating photograph.
And then we've got a sequence here.
Let's go on to the next one.
Here the bombs are closer to the target.
They're a little bit more spread out as they're heading down.
And that's the city of Royanne that we see there that's on the beach.
And then move on to the third one and the bombs have dropped.
And you can see sort of in the right center of the photograph where the bombs have dropped and the smoke is rising.
Yeah, that's more inland where the Germans had retreated into their bunkers or revetments or whatever, but they didn't have their heavy guns anymore.
And these are photographs that were taken out of your airplane at the time that it happened.
All right, let's move on.
What's this group?
Okay, that's when I was at Bryan, no, Spencefield, Georgia, in primary pilot screening.
The man on the left is Joe Barker, class of 50 A&M, and that's Mr. Shube.
I'm in the Air Force uniform.
I was airdromal officer for that day.
We took turns doing it.
I'm a captain.
And there's Mr. Shube, a great instructor-pilot, and that's a French student right there, Balain, and a Belgian Balafan on the right.
We had foreign students in there.
We had one that laid the chassis his father made commander of the French Air Force.
Right.
And he was in another unit.
What's that plane?
Is that an Avenger?
And that's the T-6 Texan.
Oh, okay.
And I laid the cream across that exact airplane owned by somebody.
I knew the tail number.
And somebody at an air show at, I believe, at Brownsville.
Yeah.
My exact airplane.
All right.
Let's move on to the, I think we've got one more.
That's one of your planes.
Yeah, that was a plane that most everybody had one with that rather interesting name.
And it had steel plates on the side and underneath.
And I got to fly a couple of those missions.
that I flew were in that airplane.
Right, and so people can see where the navigator was.
Right.
The bombardier is in the nose, and then you're right behind the bombardier.
And you can see that little package right behind the nose is one of my guns.
Right, with the three small windows.
And there was one on the other side, and those two windows is where I looked out, and I had a turret where I could shoot the stars or get the headings.
Right, and you operated a gun on each side.
Right.
Right, right.
All right.
Who's that guy with Ed Higgins?
Right.
Bob Hope, who was a great friend of the military, and he came here, I believe, in 84 to speak.
And I know Jackie Sherrill made him an honorary Aggie, but I was in my Confederate Air Force uniform, and we made him an honorary colonel in the Aggie wing.
And he said, I'll play golf down at Palm Springs and wear that cap.
So he came here to speak, and I always greatly admired what he did.
Right, right.
He's looking right at you.
And this is a poster that you have that we took a picture of, a final view of the B-17.
That's a beautiful poster.
And you flew in this plane.
Yeah, I flew a practice mission in that mission, that airplane after the war, when we were training to go sharpen up our navigation and then go convert to B-29s.
And it was called A Bit of Lace.
It was named for one of the Steve Canyon...
airplane, one of his things he had.
So it was the nose art.
And you see it had a lot of emissions on it.
Those are great pictures.
I know like most who fought in Europe after the war in Europe was over, you, like everybody else, was planning to go west to go to Japan, but then the bomb changed all that.
You went to Northwestern State, got a math degree, you went to grad school at Colorado, and then you were recalled to active duty after serving in the reserves.
Sort of take us from there and tell us what you did.
When I was recalled to active duty, I went to...
sent down to California and got upgraded as Navigator, our bomb instructor.
Then I came to Ellington
and where at Ellington, I was a flight commander and would take students all the way through the navigation training in Bombardier.
I had a class that had such pretty girls, and I recommended one guy for instructor, and when he came back for his vacation, he introduced me, and that was my first wife, who I lost to cancer later, but Virginia Wills.
Wills was her father, who was a doctor at Baylor Med School, and had been a commander in the Navy in World War II.
and a great gentleman.
Anyway, she went with me on my career, and her uncle was commander of the Louisiana Air National Guard, had flown the hump, and she said, I got a chance to go to pilot school, and she said, great, you ought to go.
So the next day, I walked my thing through Flytaf headquarters, and away I went to Moultrie and then to Bryan Air Force Base.
Yeah, you found out at age 30 that you could still be a pilot.
I was delighted.
I love flying.
I had gotten my private pilot license when I was over at Northwestern so I could fly Piper J3 Cubs, but this was nice to be able to fly jet trainers here at Bryan.
Right, and you were a captain by then.
I was a captain, so that beat being a cadet, but I was glad to help straighten up after we did our flying every day.
Right.
Eventually, you went to San Antonio for training in the spy plane, the U-2.
Talk about that.
I was going to go there.
You were going to do that.
It never came out.
After I graduated, I went back to Ellington, where we were going to get some multi-time and then go to the U-2 program.
But then they found I didn't have enough time.
So instead, I ended up going overseas to Newfoundland, flying in the Arctic, which was great in that I flew with some great instrument pilots and learned how to fly very good instruments.
And when I came back, I came back to Ardmore, Oklahoma, and came down to visit at A&M.
And Dr. Fred Smith and his wife, Odette, were friends of Colonel Dittman.
And I interested, I said, I would like to be an instructor.
So she picked up the phone, called Colonel Dittman.
I went over to visit with him.
He picked up the phone and called Fly Dive headquarters and said, I want this man.
So then I was at A&M instructing, and after four years, I got a chance.
General Schreiber said, get another degree, and I'll put you in the space program.
So at 36, I got my Texas Aggie degree.
I was delighted to become officially an Aggie.
Exactly.
Because I admired them so much, and then to be one.
And of course, I ended up back in the space program for my final career, but then went to Northrop after I retired at NASA for 15 years in all the exciting and some catastrophe areas.
Right, right.
Production and procurement, that's what you were in.
I was in production and procurement as a senior engineer.
And what did that involve at NASA, just briefly?
Well, it involves putting together a proposal, usually,
I would track what we were doing.
Every month I got a printout from our computer section as to how we were doing on our pricing and if we needed to hire or fire.
And Northrop was a wonderful company.
And when my late wife was infected with breast cancer, they said, just come in when you can, but I had a good staff.
And so that was wonderful, the way they took care of her.
And incidentally, after I lost her,
One of the ladies who was taking care of her after about a year and a half said, I think you ought to meet somebody.
And I said, well, I'm not looking.
And that was my little Paige, who was a teacher at St.
John's and a wonderful lady.
And when I met her and some of her students said, you were just a wonderful teacher.
I said, I like what I'm hearing.
That's right.
And now we're 31 years down the road.
Indeed.
You married her in 1977.
You came back to work at A&M where you still work today in the Department of Animal Science.
Just talk briefly about what you do because you work every morning.
Right.
We have projects
through the Texas A&M Experiment Station, but it's in the animal science building, where we take whatever product is put before us.
We might sniff it.
We might see how it looks.
Usually we taste it.
And we are in isolation booths, which are rated.
And it's a fun, interesting job.
Many are PhD or master programs.
I've seen people go on to great promotions and great jobs down.
After all, everybody loves to eat and needs to eat.
Absolutely.
And the 30 minutes goes so quickly and we are out of time.
But what a wonderful, wonderful career.
And we thank you for being here and thank you for your service.
Thanks for having me.
All right.
Ed Higgins career took him from the European theater of World War Two to NASA and the space program and eventually as a civilian to Texas A&M, where he still works as a program assistant in the animal science department.
He and Paige have been married 31 years, and he'll proudly speak of his children, his grandchildren and his three great grandchildren.
We salute the service of Ed Higgins of College Station as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank of